Oh Lord, we thank you that you call us your people.
Thank you God that you are our God and that you have given us your word so that we might know you, know who you are and what you've done.
Lord, we ask that as we approach your word today that we would do so in humility, that we would do so in expectation, that we would do so with open minds and hearts to receive what you have for us.
God, we pray for our youngest ones in the nursery.
that they would be receiving your love and any stories, any songs, any words that they hear would be words that come from your people and out of hearts of love and desire, desire to see them grow.
God, we pray for what our youth are doing downstairs.
They're talking about the Lord's Supper.
Lord, we pray for Pastor Matt and pray that you'd give him words to help encourage them, help them to understand this sacrament, this gift that you give us.
Lord, form us, shape us, all into your disciples.
Through your word, through the fellowship of your body.
In Jesus' name we pray, Amen.
All right, Exodus 15, one through 21.
This is called the Song of Moses.
Again, after the Israelites come out of, come through the Red Sea.
Then Moses and the Israelites sang this song to the Lord.
I will sing to the Lord for he is highly exalted.
Both horse and driver, he has hurled into the sea.
The Lord is my strength and my defense.
He has become my salvation.
He is my God and I will praise him.
My father's God and I will exalt him.
The Lord is a warrior.
The Lord is his name.
Pharaoh's chariots and his army he has hurled into the sea.
The best of Pharaoh's officers are drowned in the Red Sea.
The deep waters have covered them.
They sink to the depths like a stone.
Your right hand, Lord, was majestic in power.
Your right hand, Lord, shattered the enemy.
In the greatness of your majesty, you threw down those who opposed you.
You unleashed your burning anger at consumed them like stubble.
By the blast of your nostrils, the waters piled up.
The surging waters stood still like a wall.
The deep waters congealed in the heart of the sea.
The enemy boasted, I will pursue.
I will overtake them.
I will divide the spoils.
I will gorge myself on them.
I will draw my sword and my hand will destroy them.
But you blew with your breath and the sea covered them.
They sank like lead in the mighty waters.
Who among the gods is like you, Lord?
Who is like you, majestic in holiness, awesome in glory, working wonders.
You stretch out your right hand and the earth swallows your enemies, and your unfailing love you will lead the people you have redeemed.
In your strength, you will guide them to your holy dwelling.
The nations will hear and tremble.
Anguish will grip the people of Philistia.
The chiefs of Edom will be terrified.
The leaders of Moab will be seized with trembling.
The people of Canaan will melt away.
Terran dread will fall on them.
For the power of your arm they will be as still as a stone until your people pass by, Lord, until the people you bought pass by.
You will bring them in and plant them on the mountain of your inheritance, the place, Lord, you made for your dwelling, the sanctuary, Lord, your hands established.
The Lord reigns forever and ever.
And when Pharaoh's chariots, horses' chariots and horsemen went into the sea, the Lord brought the waters of the sea back over them.
But the Israelites walked through the sea on dry ground.
Then Miriam, the prophet, Aaron's sister took a timber in her hand, and all the women followed her with timbrels and a dancing.
Miriam sang to them, sing to the Lord, for he is highly exalted.
Both horse and driver, he has hurled into the sea.
This is the word of the Lord and together we say, thanks be to God.
Now I want you to imagine, imagine that you are, you're driving around this afternoon.
Maybe, maybe you're alone, but you get to thinking.
You get to thinking about the year that was 2025.
You think about it's the good things that happened.
the accomplishments, you think about maybe the not so good things that happened, the disappointments, you think about the mundane, the man things that happened.
Or maybe your mind starts to take you to what's up ahead.
You wonder, what does 2026 hold?
What will happen with my work?
What will happen?
Will there be any new or changing relationships?
What is gonna happen with health, with loved ones?
Is there anything that you're carrying over from 25 into 26?
So you're driving and you're thinking about the past 25.
You're thinking about the future, 26 of the new year.
It serves as this time of transition, the time of transition for us to look back, a time of transition for us to look forward and to take stock of what is going on and what has been.
So as you're driving,
down the road, you decide that you're going to turn on a song.
When I was thinking about it, I was like, oh, you're going to turn on the radio.
I was like, no, who uses the radio now?
They don't use the radio.
Just put on a song of your choice.
So I want you to think, well, what is the song?
What is the song that you are going to put on that captures where you are at in the present moment?
What is the song that is going to represent where you've been in 25 and maybe where you're going in 26?
What is that song that you are going to turn on, the song, the song for your new year?
Now, if you're like us, maybe you've been consumed by the songs from K-pop demon hunters, that movie?
Yeah, collective, collective woo-hoo.
All right, well, maybe, okay, so maybe, maybe the words of the popular song Golden.
I know there's a lot of people that are like, what demon hunter?
What are we getting into today?
But there's a song that's called Golden.
It's very popular.
It has the words, come on, Stuart, I know you can sing it.
And I'm done hiding.
No, I'm shining.
like I'm born to be.
There you go.
So maybe, maybe 2025 was this year.
Maybe you were covered up because of something in your life, something that was coming over.
You didn't feel like yourself, you're hiding, pretending, or maybe now this, it's already 26.
You say, you know, I'm gonna kind of step it lean into more of who I am, more feeling like I'm myself.
Or maybe it's a song.
Has it take to do this?
Maybe it's a song, Taylor Swift's song, The Fate of Ophelia.
No, okay, nobody.
All right.
Maybe you, 2025 was a hard year for you.
Maybe it was a year where you experienced a lot of hardship and maybe the life was just sucked out of you.
In 2026, you're looking for renewal, you're looking for rescue, maybe you're looking for better relationships.
What is the song that represents where you're at as you look back and as you look forward?
But as you think about this song, I want you to know that the Lord has given us a song.
He's given us as his people a song to sing as we begin this new time.
What's this song that comes out of the Exodus story?
Now Israel has, they're at this fulcrum point, this turning point in their lives as a people, in their lives with God, but they are standing on the edge of the sea, the Red Sea, they've just seen Pharaoh's army swallowed up.
And so it's a new time, but it's also a time of unknown.
It's a time of unknown for who they are as a people now, because for 400 years they've been living as slaves to the Egyptians.
For 400 years, they have been forced into labor by the Egyptians.
They've been ruthlessly worked night and day by their slave drivers.
The Egyptians are building cities for Egypt.
No longer do they have control or say over what they do in their lives.
Now, for everything that they've needed, for their food, for their land, for their protection, they've been turned to Egypt.
So what does it look like now to live an independent life?
Unknown.
Well, there's also this unknown.
You talk about freedom.
Well, freedom, oh, who's going to protect us now?
They're here on the edge of the shore.
They know they can't stay here.
They've been commanded to move on.
They can't just set up shop, but these are also men
women and children who were slaves, who were used to manual labor.
These are not soldiers.
So who's going to protect them?
They know they're going into enemy territories.
They know they're going to face the Philistines, the Moabites, the Edomites.
They're going to face the Canaanites.
Well, who is going to protect them?
And also, this God, who is this God?
Who is the Lord?
Who is this Yahweh?
Who is the great I am?
Is He greater than the gods of Egypt that they've probably been interacting with?
Can they trust Him?
Who is this God?
What is the song that Egypt or that the Israelites are singing as they turn from slavery in Egypt and now they're going into this time of the unknown?
Now for us as individuals.
For us, as individuals, we are encountering a new year.
And there are many, many unknowns that are coming up.
And some of these are going to be carryovers from 2025.
And so as we head into this, we look and we say, OK, maybe you're experiencing or carrying over grief from a loved one who has passed.
Maybe you have a little bit of a fear or maybe you have a little bit of anger or pain over a broken relationship.
Maybe there's fear over what is going on in our country, what is going on in our world.
Maybe you have unrest as you think about your work or your job uncertainties at Dow or any other place where you might work.
Maybe you're carrying something into the new year, something that's very heavy.
We're facing these times of unknown.
But it's not just as our lives and our lives as individuals.
It's us as we head into a new season as a church.
We're doing this collectively.
Because for a while, our song has been one of exhaustion and pain and grief and maybe confusion.
Now, you've experienced the COVID and everything that happened through COVID.
Political divisions that have been happening since around 2015, 2016, even before that, you've experienced the pastoral change.
There's been a congregational staff conflict and staff change.
There's been denominational issues over human sexuality and how all that works out.
We've come to this point now.
Now we're in a point where maybe now we're moving forward.
We've been through that rough time of conflict, and now we're moving forward, we have a new mission.
Learning to live and love like Jesus has broken people saved by grace.
I encourage you to remember that.
It might benefit you during our potluck.
Learning to live and love like Jesus has broken people saved by grace.
We have a new, we have a three-year action plan going forward.
We're going to be engaging with worship.
What does worship look like?
And how does it impact our lives in a weekly basis, day-to-day basis, as we live as Christ disciples?
We're going to be looking at our next generation.
How can we pour into the next generation?
We're going to be engaging with our community impact.
We have a plan.
to go out and minister to our community, especially in the areas of food insecurity and loneliness.
There are new people in the congregation.
There's new life in the congregation.
Our song is changing, isn't it?
But there are still unknowns ahead.
What is the economy going to look like?
in 26 and what will that do as a church?
What will that do as a church?
There are gonna be hot button issues in 2026 that we will be forced to engage with.
How will we handle that?
How will we handle that as a church?
Now the shape, the shape of Christianity is changing in our country.
What does that mean for a Midland Reform church?
What kind of issues are we gonna have to encounter as a collective body in the new year?
What are we singing?
What is the song that we are singing in this time?
Well, for Israel, these people who are in a time of transition, who are on the banks of the Red Sea.
Well, God has given them a song.
God has given them a song to sing as they begin their journey, and it is a song of praise.
There's a song of praise, praise.
Praise, just in short, as you think about it, praise is nothing other than telling God who he is and recounting what he's done.
So it's recounting his mighty deeds and it's proclaiming his character.
And as we think about this passage, this song of praise, it looks back on the past deliverance that the Israelites have experienced and it looks forward to the promised future.
This is not so much a song about themselves.
This is a song that is directed towards God, towards who he is and towards what he has done and all of his might and all of his power.
So first, we'll talk about it.
It looks back on the past.
It looks back on what has just happened.
Well, the Israelites are standing there and they have just come out.
They've just walked on dry ground across the Red Sea, the bed of the Red Sea.
It's dry ground, it says.
Well, they're looking back now and they see that this wall of water, this congealed wall of water has come crashing down on the most powerful army in the world.
Pharaoh and his elite, his choice army, the chariots and those who are riding on the chariots and the horses.
And they see as these people, these animals, these instruments, they bob up and down in the water and they finally sink to their death for finality, final death here.
Who does this?
How do they read this?
How do they interpret this?
Is this done by chance?
Is this done by the hand of Moses, a mere man?
What is going on?
Well, in this song, we read that it comes by the strength of the Lord.
It comes by his outstretched hand.
Lord, by your outstretched hand, you have swallowed up your enemies.
Now, if you go back and you read through the Exodus story, this is something that is repeated time and again as Moses confronts Pharaoh.
God says to Moses, Moses, I want you to go and I want you to stretch out your hand over the waters of Egypt and they will turn to blood.
Moses, I want you to go out and I want you to stretch your hand out over the sky and it will bring downhill.
Moses, I want you to go out in before Pharaoh.
I want you to stretch your hand out over the land and there will be swarms of locusts.
The Israelites are interpreting what has just happened now.
And if there's any question, if there's any confusion about who or what has happened, this is dispelled when they hear that it is the arm, the outstretched arm, the hand, the majestic and mighty hand of the Lord that has brought this to pass.
The Lord has freed them from their enemies.
And so now they are singing a song of deliverance of the Lord.
The God over all creation has brought about.
Because this is not just, this is not just deliverance from a single enemy in a single spot in history.
This is symbolic of the Lord's defeat, his shattering of evil and depression.
So they sing this song of praise.
Now for us as we look back on the past,
We look back on what was.
We are also given a song of praise for our past deliverance, because we too were slaves.
We too were controlled by masters, but our masters, this master was stronger than the Egyptian slave drivers.
This master was sin.
It controlled us.
It told us what to do.
It controlled our thoughts.
It controlled what we were doing.
It poisoned the relationship that we had with God.
It turned us away from God and from His ways.
But into the midst of this, that Jesus Christ came down.
Jesus Christ came down and He stood between us and our enemies.
And that Jesus Christ, He allowed sin to chase Him to the cross.
he allowed a sin in the evil to crucify him and to kill him.
And when this happened, when Jesus Christ died and he breathed his last breath, it looked as if evil and sin was going to triumph, that they were the victors.
But on the third day, on the third day as he rose up from the grave, Jesus Christ, he broke the chains that were shackling him of death and evil and sin.
Jesus Christ, he,
He Himself went from death to life.
And as our Belgic Confession says, that Jesus Christ has become our Red Sea, that now through Him we pass from death into life.
That our rescue, that our exodus, that our salvation, our deliverance has been brought about has come at the work of Jesus Christ.
So as we look back now on 2026, this is back on 2025,
This is the song of praise that we sing, our deliverance, that as we stand here at this turning point, at this transitional point, we know that everything that we do now, it comes through this.
It comes through this lens that we are held tightly in the hands of this God who has claimed us as his own, this God who has called us, his children, this God who has declared his love for us.
That sin no longer has power over us, that when we do give in to sin that we are forgiven, and that Jesus Christ has done what we couldn't do in bringing us back to God.
So our song is a song of praise for past deliverance, but it's not just about the past.
We know of this song that the Israelites sing, it's also about the future.
It's about the future that God has promised to them.
Well, the Israelites, well, they know.
They know that they're vulnerable.
They know that there are enemies up ahead in Philistia and Edom and Molab and Canaan.
But they know that they are secure, that they are held tightly and the hands of the Lord because of His character and because of His action.
This is who the Lord is and this is what the Lord has done.
They know that God, He has not only redeemed them, He's not only set them free, but He will bring them into the place of His dwelling.
It says, Lord, that you will buy your strength, you will lead the people that you have redeemed.
Buy your strength, you will guide them.
Because in your, he says in your faithful love, this is a covenant love.
This is a love that does not go away.
This is a promised love that it finds its fulfillment in what God does.
And as you look, as you read this,
The Israelites, they say, this is the God of our ancestors, the God of my ancestors.
They say, this is my God.
They probably claim this God for themselves now because they've seen, they've seen what God has done.
The God of Isaac, the God of Abraham, the God of Jacob.
Now this is their God and he has been faithful.
And since he has been faithful, he will continue to be faithful as he leads them now on this journey.
And so for us, for us as we move forward,
into this new year.
As we face the unknowns, this is what we hold to.
We hold to the promise that has been given to us by God, that he is our God, and that he will not leave us.
The promise that he will never turn away from us, that he will never forsake us.
And this is the God who has claimed us as his own.
This is the God who is strong and mighty in power.
Just pause for a second.
How often do we limit the size of God?
How often do we limit the might of God?
How often do we limit what God can do?
And this passage says that God, He is a warrior.
His name is the Lord and He is a warrior.
He is a man of war.
It says, well, this is that same God.
God does not change.
This is a God who is still fighting for His people and for His mission.
What is God's mission?
Oh, God's mission is to bring renewal into the world.
God's mission is to bring an end to evil, to bring an end to injustice, to bring an end to oppression.
Oh, God's mission is to take His people and to lead them to the fulfillment of their journey, which is into His presence.
And God has done this in Jesus Christ, and God will continue to do this and bring it into fulfillment, bring us into fulfillment into His presence.
Not because of what we've done, not because we're strong enough, not because of our might, not because of our wisdom, not because we get things right, but because the Lord is mighty, but because the Lord is faithful.
We know that whatever comes up in this year, that God will continue to be faithful to us because this is his character, this is his nature, this is who God is.
So what is the song?
What is the song that you're singing in your individual life?
as we head into a new year.
In middle-informed church, what is the song that we are singing as a church?
God has given us a song of praise, a song of praise for who he is, a song of praise for what he's done in Jesus Christ, a song of praise for what he promises, what he guarantees to do, all for the glory of his name and for the good of his people.
All God's people said, amen.
What shall I return to the Lord for His goodness to me?
This is what the yellow slip says that's somewhere on your pew back or your bench seat next to you.
We are to be people of response, people that respond to God's grace, people that respond to God's action in our lives.
So just to take a moment and to consider, what is your response to God?
after reading his word, after hearing his word preached.
What is it that God is stirring inside of you to respond?
What is the song that I'm singing as I head into this year?
Am I seeking strength or fulfillment in anything other than God?
Am I seeking out strength in myself, strengthen the rulers of the world, strengthen the systems of the world?
Am I putting my trust into the one God?
Is there a situation in this new year that I need to surrender to God?
who subdues our enemies.
Do I need to repent of refusing to follow his lead and submitting to his will?
Do I need to receive his grace in a renewed way?
Take a minute or two if you want to write it down on the yellow piece of paper just to make it real.
If you want to take a picture of it, just to remind you of it in your phone for the week, how is God calling you to respond to his word and to his grace?